Most Americans when they hear AI, they
get afraid. Right? The vast, vast
majority of Americans, AI equals
anxiety. I'm going to lose my job.
Um I get that. You know, people are
scared.
I think it would be a huge mistake to
like our
AI progress with over-regulation.
Just talked about China. I want to win
the AI race. I want America to lead the
AI world.
And I think
when we get to the fifth or sixth inning
of this AI
revolution, whatever you want to call
it, I firmly believe there will be there
will be more jobs. I do. I think
there'll be new industries, new
companies, new products and services.
I'm an optimist.
I am pretty worried about getting from
the first inning to that inning.
Hello and welcome [music] to a live
episode of the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Joe
Weisenthal. And I'm Tracy Alloway. So
for I guess for listeners who are
hearing us here at CFR many to talk
about truly do have the perfect guest
with us. We're going to be speaking with
CFR distinguished fellow Gina Raimondo,
previously the Commerce Secretary,
previously Governor of Rhode Island. So
uh Gina, looking forward to chatting. Me
too. Thank you for having me. Uh there's
so much
there's so much to talk about. By the
way, what's the date today? It's April
1st. We always make a make a note of
that these days because
>> in the time. Yeah, it's
What time is it? 11:45 cuz so much is
liable to change by the time other
people hear this episode. But I want to
start um I saw a headline this morning.
President Trump, he's said to give a
speech tonight related to the war in
Iran and according to a report, I think
it was a Reuters report, he's going to
criticize NATO heavily. They haven't
gotten involved in the war, etc. Maybe
threaten to pull out of NATO yet again.
And I'm curious from your perspective,
you know, how thick is the ice right now
between the US and Europe? And how
how much will how much more is there for
it to thin? Yeah, that's a really good
question. It does It does make sense.
Hello everybody. It's great to be here.
It's great to be on the show.
I don't think it's that thick.
The last time I was in Europe was I
guess a month and a half ago for the
Munich Security Conference and spent a
lot of time with European ministers,
military leaders, CEOs. And I think
their patience is wearing thin with us.
And somewhat justifiably.
So, I don't think it's very thick.
Listen, I understand the president's
point. If he thinks European countries
aren't pulling their weight or doing
their fair share as it relates to
investing in their military capacity and
and participating in NATO,
that being said, I mean, it's not clear
to me that before we invaded, we had a
strategic plan with our European allies
um
to get involved.
>> Right.
>> And so, you know, it's it's like a lot
of things with this administration.
Maybe not a terrible idea, but very poor
execution.
So, I know when you were Commerce
Secretary, you obviously spent a lot of
your time thinking about US versus China
technology situation.
And I know you argued also that we
actually need Europe when we think about
that because if we're going to have
something like export controls in the
US, it doesn't really work if US if
Europe doesn't come along with us. When
you think about economic security in the
context of let's just say fraying
US-European relations, where we headed?
I think we're in a bad place. If you
were to say to So, I a few things.
I don't think we can effectively compete
with China
economically, technologically, without
allies.
Right? They're just too big. They're too
big, they're too determined. And so, we
need allies, including Europe. By the
way, including Southeast Asia.
Including the global South.
And so, if you were to say to me, "Hey,
what do you think is the biggest
mistake about how this administration is
handling China and their China
strategy?" I would say,
pissing off all our allies.
Why? It's just not a good idea. By the
way, it's not good for Europe. You know,
when I was in Europe, in Munich,
what I would say to the Europeans is,
"I know you're unhappy with us, but
we're your closest ally, and it isn't
good for you to cozy up to China."
I mean, if you look at now
what China is doing to Europe,
it's a it's terrible for Europe. The
Chinese imports
to Europe have surged. I can't remember
the exact number, but it's like 20-30%
more imports from China to Europe this
year, year-to-date, versus last year.
The German industrial base is going to
get crushed. Like, this is China's play.
They run the play over and over again.
They subsidize, they
dis- dump cheap products into the global
market, in this case, Europe, also
Africa,
distort the price, and it makes it
impossible to compete. So, like, that's
bad for America. It weakens our allies
in Europe. By the way, it's bad for
Europe.
So, I just think, and that's why the ice
is thinning, but you know, my point to
Europe is, "Okay, your feelings are
hurt, but China's not your friend."
Yeah, let's talk about this a little bit
more because this phenomenon is like,
all right, Germany has an incredible
history of chemical giants and
automotive giants obviously and so
forth. And there's a lot that gets
talked about in the US Europe
relationship these days primarily
centered on defense and NATO spending
etc.
But it does feel to me like there is
comparably less attention paid to just
what is the what is industrial Europe
even going to be in the future cuz they
don't have our tech, right? They don't
have our Metas and Alphabets and Open
AIs to the same degree. I could not
agree more.
So and of course you know, I was the
Commerce Secretary so my focus is
economic security economic alliances,
technology security.
Um
So again, I personally think a weak
European economy and a weak European
technology sector is definitely bad for
them but also bad for us. We want strong
allies.
And so when I was in Munich while the
talk was of course around NATO and their
military capacity
every speech I gave a person I spoke
with, I talked about their supply chains
their industrial base
their the fact that it'll be almost
impossible them to compete if China
continues to like I said, distort the
global market and take advantage of
them. And the
particularly Germany talk about the
chemical companies and the auto
companies, the damage China is doing
right now their industrial base is
significant. So I
I wish people would talk more about it.
Of course all the focus is on NATO is
the shiny object. Everyone's focused on
the military which is very important.
But it you know, it's it's just like
supply chain in America.
It's it's like the frog's boiled and
doesn't know it. For decades we allowed
our supply chains to wither
and atrophy. And then you wake up 20, 30
years later and you're massively reliant
on China. So, let's wake up today and do
something about it. Yeah, the European
situation, I mean, it does come up
depending on what the talking point du
jour is. So, if it's AI, people are
like, "Well, Europe is behind in AI."
Then I was reading a note just yesterday
from Credit Suisse talking about
petrochemicals and saying, "Well, Europe
is in a really bad place when it comes
to petrochemicals. US a little bit more
insulated and China is basically almost
like 100% self-reliant for some things,
which is pretty amazing if you think
back to the situation just 20 or 30
years ago."
When it comes to building up European
strategic industry, let's say, or
technology,
what role do you see for the US in that?
Because it feels like everyone's trying
to do the same thing at the same time.
The US is trying to develop its own
ecosystem of, you know, either industry
or strategic technology. China is trying
to do it. Europe maybe should be trying
to do it, but how is everyone doing it
at the same time? And what should the US
actually be advocating for here?
We should be working with our allies
to shore up all of these supply chains.
Listen, I don't think America needs to
be, can be, or should try to be
mining everything, making everything,
you know, that we need.
Japan
is a juggernaut in chemicals.
That's okay. They're one of our closest
allies.
Uh Europe has had a long uh successful
industrial base.
So, as long as we have some
diversification,
that's a good thing. And as long as
we're working with allies and have
allies,
that's a good thing.
The scary things are when we are overly
dependent on one country, especially if
the country is China.
And if Europe's Like I personally think
it is bad for America and the world and
Europe that they have such an anemic
technology ecosystem.
Um
And that you know, there's a lot of
reasons they have that. It's over
regulated. They don't have a capital
market. They
This you know, I thought the Draghi
report kind of was excellent, laid it
out and they need to act on it. But my
point is
you know, why can't we work more closely
with Europe to shore up our supply
chain? Good for them, good for us. By
the way, the Philippines has nickel.
Indonesia has critical minerals.
You know,
there's some things we do need to work
with allies and China is all over those
countries. I think the most frustrating
thing I hear
and it's a political argument and I'm a
politician or former politician and it
drives me bananas.
When I have
quiet meetings with very senior people
in Europe, ministers, prime ministers,
CEOs, I say to them,
"You're cozying up with China
cuz you're mad with America with the how
Trump's behaving.
Okay, I understand why you'd be mad.
Cozying up with China is bad for you.
Arguably, it's worse for you than us.
Why are you doing that?" And they would
say, "Well, we feel like we have to, but
you pushed us into that corner." Which
is things politicians say. Like, "Okay,
you can be self-destructive cuz it saves
face, but I don't think it's a good
idea."
I feel like there's one thing I have to
push back on there as a former European
capital markets correspondent. Europe
does have capital markets. They're just
not as robust as some others, for sure.
For sure. They're not deep, they're not
dynamic.
>> don't want to get angry emails from my
former contacts going like They're only
mad at me, not you.
Um
But like how much of it is
sort of classic politics? Like they had
the people who you're talking to, like
they have to get reelected. And there's
one guy on their TVs who continues to
insult them and frequently and instigate
and etc. And that's Trump and there's
someone else who
as I know never publicly says anything
negative about Europe unless she's in
pain. Like Yeah.
Yeah. They have to get elected, right?
And so you can say logically look, it
doesn't long-term maybe the US Europe
relationship will change and so forth,
but like they were politicians like you
once were. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So I hear that. I do hear that and
that's why I said
I think
probably the biggest mistake
of the current administration's China
strategy Yeah. is
uh
hurting our relationship with allies. I
don't
>> Right. I don't see a path to pushing
back on China effectively
unless we work with our allies. So I I I
hear I do I hear you.
I guess um now everyone can laugh at me.
I guess I still hold, you know,
politicians to a higher standard. I mean
their job isn't actually to get
reelected. Their job is to do the job
and serve the people that elected them.
And when I even, you know, when I was uh
secretary, I would frequently talk to
members of Congress who would say
I know you might be right, but I can't
be with you. I'll lose a primary.
And having been on the ballot and
stood for election many times and had
brutal primaries, my reply is always
isn't that a badge of honor? Go down
doing the right thing. Be a public
servant, not a
quote unquote politician. But I hear
it's a lot of traditional what politics
is.
Setting politics aside for a second cuz
I imagine it's going to recur in this
conversation. When you talk to
businesses, so executives, I mean a lot
of them still see China as the second
biggest economy in the world, which it
is, and this huge destination market.
And even now when it comes to maybe more
sensitive technologies like AI,
we are seeing
people for instance, a lot of big
businesses in the US opt to use
something like Kwai, the Chinese open
source model.
How do you talk to executives who are
maybe worried about their share price,
worried about the bottom line, and tell
them like, "Oh, wait a second. Maybe
there are other reasons not to engage
with China in this way." Yeah.
Well, look, I actually, I mean again, I
think trade with China is a good thing.
I think
trade is is a good thing. It creates
jobs in America. It allows our companies
to compete.
Um I think our trading relationship with
China is, you know, it's
is hundreds of billions of dollars. The
vast majority of that is in products
that have nothing to do with national
security.
And in fact, when I was secretary, I
create I to make this point that trade
is a good thing, I started an export
export promotion initiative
for
health and beauty products. Like my
theory was, no one could say lipstick,
perfume, blush, [clears throat] eyeliner
is a national security issue. If we sell
more of our stuff to China, it makes
creates jobs in America.
So,
and also I do think engagement,
commercial engagement, diplomatic
engagement
does
>> [clears throat]
>> reduce the probability of conflict. So,
I'm for all that.
The The challenge is in like selling our
most sophisticated leading-edge chips to
China.
Um
or
you know, certain AI or hypersonics.
Like when you get into that, well, then
then that's a very different thing. But
by the way, that is a tiny As far as I'm
concerned, the more stuff American
companies can sell to China that doesn't
hurt our national security interest is a
good thing. I want American companies to
be, you know, profitable and successful.
Right. But if you have large
corporations in the US who are using an
open-source model developed in China
like Kuan, is that something that would
concern you? I mean, it's open-source.
It is as you say, it's open-source. It's
hard to put that genie back in the
bottle.
And
so, I I'm not sure exactly. I think
that's less concerning.
Uh as long as there are other controls.
Now, these companies have to have their
own Right.
>> data controls, privacy controls, cyber
controls, et cetera.
Let's talk about AI a little bit more
cuz you've been writing about it, you've
been talking to people about it. What
are you working on? Is it What have you
been working on?
You know,
>> you been up to?
>> I'm remarkably busy for someone who, you
know, doesn't have a single job. Uh
well, since Mike Froman who runs the
council is there, I'll say I spend a lot
of time helping the Council on Foreign
Relations.
Uh Uh actually, in all seriousness, we
put out a report that I'm proud of as it
relates to economic security.
>> Uh-huh. And it really it had to do with
AI, and the whole point of it
I strongly believe
trying to slow China down is a fool's
errand. Let's invest and beat them by
innovating faster in core technologies
like AI, quantum, and biotech.
The thing I'm spending the most time on
is
the issue of
how do we get through the transition to
an AI economy?
I I want to talk for just a second on
this. I appreciate you asking.
>> So,
here's how I see it. And maybe your
listeners will push back or like it.
Right now, most Americans when they hear
AI, they get afraid. Right? The vast
vast majority of Americans, AI equals
anxiety, I'm going to lose my job.
Um
I get that, you know, people are scared.
I think it would be a huge mistake to
like our
AI progress with over-regulation.
Just talked about China. I want to win
the AI race. I want America to lead the
AI world.
And I think
when we get to the fifth or sixth inning
of this AI
revolution, whatever you want to call
it, I firmly believe there will be there
will be more jobs. I do. I think
there'll be new industries, new
companies, new products and services.
I'm an optimist.
I am pretty worried about getting from
the first inning to that inning.
And so, what I am spending my time on is
how do we create support systems,
transition systems, incentives for
companies
not to just do these big riffs.
Because here's my my view.
Yes, we want to win the AI race. Yes, we
want to be the leader in the world on
AI.
We will not
do that.
Even if we have If all we have is the
best models, the best chips, the biggest
data centers,
but sky-high unemployment and no
transition system, that's not winning.
That's automating America's decline.
Mhm.
So, as much effort as we're putting into
winning the chip, AI, and data center
race,
we better putting that same amount of
urgency, effort, and innovation into
coming up with systems to cushion us
through the transition. Otherwise, we
won't win. We won't win. Civil unrest,
political violence, 15% unemployment
rate, that's not winning the AI race.
And
uh so, let's get practical. What are the
new policies, and new systems, and new
training, and new incentives for
companies
to get us there so we can win.
I know you're thinking about this now,
but do you have any idea of what that
could actually look like? Because I
think I don't often empathize that much
with large tech companies, but you know,
if I'm Neither do I. Right. If I'm like
a Meta or a Google or whoever, um and
I'm being told that like not only am I
in an existential race with every other
tech company out there to win on AI, but
I am also in an existential tech race
with China on behalf of the US. And
also, I now have to think about the
social implications of what I'm doing,
and maybe I have to think about ways to
either, you know, slow it down or manage
it in a better way for society. That's a
lot to put on a private company. Yeah,
by the way, I don't think it should just
be put on them. No way am I saying By
the way, I I mean, I'm not sure why we
would blame them. I mean, if they create
a new technology and every company in
America adopts it,
who do you who do you  blame? I I
wouldn't put it in terms of blame. Like,
I love it that American companies
are
are winning the race, are leading. We
have the We do. We do. We We design the
best chips. We have the best models.
That's a great thing.
I just think this is a all hands on deck
moment
for the government at the state,
federal, and local level, for every
company in America, for policy makers,
for AI companies to say,
"What does it really mean to win the AI
race?"
Because I don't
mean, winning isn't just innovating the
technology at breakneck speed if you
create,
you know, incredible social, political,
and economic unrest. You know, like,
agents don't buy things.
Right? Every company needs human beings
with money in their pocket to buy
things. This is in their interest, too.
So, I think we just have to come
together and create different set of
incentives.
I don't even Right now, you may not
agree with me. If you're the CEO of an
American company,
and you fire however many thousand
people,
it's a little hard to blame them cuz
every incentive in our system
says, "Your job is to maximize
short-term share price." So, I think
it's
time to experiment with some new
policies
that align incentives to win.
I also think this, and this is my view,
I think China,
you know, with climate um
with a lot of things, with with say,
putting
uh pulling hundreds of millions of
people out of
poverty,
China said,
"Industrialize.
Create the pollution. We'll clean up the
mess later."
They You be doing that with AI.
That doesn't work in America.
In a democratic society
putting
tens of millions of Americans out of
work precipitously
will will create the end of democracy.
We will not win the AI race. And so we
just got to get to work and be
innovative.
You know, these comments that you make
about potential civil unrest, 15%
unemployment,
end of democracy, it strikes me that the
the only people I other people that I
hear really talking about this seriously
are the heads of the major AI labs
themselves who seem very attuned to this
risk. Sitting aside European polit-
sitting aside politicians, like just
domestic American politicians, do you
think they're sufficiently homed in on
the risks that you're thinking about
right now about the potential for
domestic destabilization as a result of
AI in fairly short period of time? I do,
but I think they're
overcome with and seized by anxiety and
fear
and not
efficiently seized by okay, what are we
going to do about it? Yeah, I mean,
look, I talked to a lot I know, you
know, most of the governors Mhm. having
been a governor
and on both sides of the aisle.
What do they hear from their
constituents?
Fear.
Anti-data center. It manifests itself in
anti-data center stuff. And that
obviously has taken off and there's a
support but but but what you've been
talking about is
like that's not going to cut it.
Like in terms of like the yeah. So what
what like what should they be doing? I
think they should be saying
how do we look at Okay.
The question everyone says is okay, what
are the new jobs? Right. Yeah.
The only people who know the answers to
that to the extent anyone does are
companies that are using the AI to grow
and AI company, you know, regular
company and AI companies that are
developing the new stuff. So, the number
one thing is how do we incentivize them
to really lean in
to start investing some of the gains
that they make from AI and efficiency
into new job creation.
Um
right now and my view for a long time
has been
post high school education in America
mostly doesn't work.
It mostly doesn't work. We can can argue
with me about it. That's my long-held
view. I was a governor who oversaw
colleges.
A lot of people who start college don't
finish. They wind up with a degree, a
bundle of loans, and then become a
barista or something like that. I became
a podcaster. You became Well, you know,
you couldn't get a job at Starbucks,
obviously.
>> I dropped out of Columbia. I don't think
I've ever said that publicly.
>> Oh, really?
>> Yeah, after 2 weeks I was like, I can't
believe I'm spending this much money and
>> Well, that was wise.
>> and I left. You see, you're smart.
That's See, you're smart. But anyway, so
what was my point? Like let's go,
people.
>> Columbia journalism school, you got your
undergrad.
Uh I did undergrad
>> what I'm saying. You did You you're
completed. I just don't I don't want you
like creating some big myth of like
Okay, you like have a regular degree and
then it was
It was a great Yeah. But by the way, who
cares if she didn't?
>> no, it's great. It's great. I just want
to, you know,
Um so, I think you know, we have we have
so many systems in this country that
were just created for a different time.
Like, truthfully
I'm excited about the potential of AI
and how
productive and healthy we could be using
it. The thing that scares the
out of me is
the systems in America that are
unemployment insurance doesn't really
help white collar worker. If you make,
you know, six figures a year,
unemployment insurance is not that
helpful.
We have really no, what I would call,
transition insurance to get from what
subsidy or something, wage subsidy, to
get from one job to another.
Adult education
is essentially
either nonexistent, poor quality, or
stigmatized.
Uh and companies have
precious little incentive to
redeploy people instead of just laying
them off.
So, what I'm highly interested to work
at the state and local level, where
things can happen,
with employers, who I would argue have
the most to gain,
um
and governments to get to the business
of trying new things. And by the way, we
can America rises to the challenge in
times of crisis. Why do we have
unemployment insurance?
Because we had the Great Depression. Why
do we have the GI Bill?
Because we had a Second World War, and
we wanted to shove everybody to college,
and it worked. 10 times as many people
go to college today than they did then.
Let's get ahead of this crisis,
and do the change that's necessary now,
so we can thrive in an AI economy.
When you talk to um businesses, or
particularly local businesses, or small
businesses, when you're doing your work
like at the state level, etc., we know
the polls about AI, and they're, as you
mentioned, they're very dismal. But
like, do you are there entrepreneurs,
are there people who are not at AI
companies, who are like right now today
very excited about what AI can do for
them?
At the Say that again.
>> At the non-AI labs. Like just the
companies that are like using AI tools.
When you go around, big or small, do you
encounter a fair number of managers,
CEOs, small business owners, who are
excited about what they're able to do
now with the technology?
>> Yes. Yes, I do. Um
I do. I'm spending some time working
with the former governor of Indiana,
Eric Holcomb. Uh-huh. Uh on this issue
and he he and I worked together when we
were governors. So, anyway, last week we
spent some time in Indiana
talking to people. He organized a couple
of roundtables to talk to people.
It was amazing to me. They were mostly
small business owners, okay?
It was incredible to me how here how
optimistic they were.
You know, I'm using AI and I've doubled
my business.
I'm able to be so much more productive.
A healthcare
uh a woman providing healthcare
consulting services said,
"I'm able to serve a lot more customers
and I haven't raised the price."
Big company CEOs, who I also talked to,
interestingly, big company CEOs
are not as convinced as the AI company
CEOs
that they're going to be laying off
huge portions of their workforce.
>> Yeah. They think it takes time. Right.
Big enterprises don't move on a dime.
And when you know, a lot of CEOs I
talked to say, "Yeah, we're going to
cut. We're going to cut over here
because we want to grow over here."
And that's
that I think it could happen. We're
going to cut here to grow here. So,
it's a mix. It's a mix. It's No one
knows. I think anyone who tells you they
know is
either delusional or lying
um or something in the middle.
>> Yeah.
And nor do I know, okay? But what I do
know is we're not going to solve the
problem by
admiring it and being afraid. We're not
going to solve the problem by stopping
AI innovation. We're sure as hell not
going to stop the problem by paying
every American to stay home and not
work.
We're not going to solve the problem by
giving business a free ride. Like, get
in the boat and let's go and fix it.
Yeah, we have been asking everyone on
the show who says that new jobs are
going to be created as a result of AI
what those jobs would actually look
like. And you're absolutely right, no
one seems to know at the moment. So, I
won't ask you that question because you
already said that you don't know.
>> one little theory.
>> Okay, go on. Um
I do have one theory.
Uh
which again, I'll also say I don't know,
but I have a theory. I think you could
see an explosion of
new small company. Hm.
And I'm hearing that from a lot of
people. It's much easier to start your
own business
uh because of AI tools. Yeah.
So, like now lots and lots of people
make a living with a restaurant or a
coffee shop or whatever.
I think it's possible we see a real
explosion of
online like new services, new online
products because people can start a
business with AI.
So, let's say I'm right. Like let's say
we do the work and it turns out to be
a decent theory. Okay, so then what do
we do about it?
How about we have some incentive How
about we create an initiative at a state
or local level where we say
Hey, uh if you're a call center worker,
you're an accountant, you're going to
get laid off. Here's a new initiative.
We're going to allow you to collect
unemployment insurance while you start
your new business. Plus, we're going to
give you a subsidy to help start that
business. Plus, the company you just got
laid off from is going to kick in
I don't know what, a little bit more of
a severance, help you to start your job.
Like
we have to get from here to there.
And we have to start experimenting with
some new stuff.
Um since we're on the topic of AI and
since you are the former commerce
secretary and you instituted a lot of
the chips controls that Joe and I spent
many years talking about
>> Trying to understand, yeah. Yeah. I'm
really curious, but when when you were
instituting those controls, did you have
AI coming down the line like so quickly
in your mind or were you thinking about
AGI or what you know, with the benefit
of hindsight?
>> Yeah. Were you right?
Ay, ay, ay, ay, yeah.
Um I mean define right. Like I think we
were like
more right than wrong
in the world of non-perfection.
Uh I did.
Now
you can choose to believe that or not,
but I don't know if any of my former
team is here.
A lot of people would say, a lot of
people would say to me,
"Hey secretary,
um you're shoveling tens of billions of
dollars of
taxpayer money
into the chip industry.
The chip industry is
famously cyclical.
Are you worried
that right when you put this money in
there's going to be a you know, a down
cycle in the chip industry?"
And I would say then, I don't think so
because of AI.
Now I would say
years ago I would say at that time,
different now, I'd say you know,
only about a third of American
businesses at that time were even in the
cloud.
You know, they're still like using Excel
and on-prem
storage.
Saying, "So we need a lot of chips for
traditional data centers."
And I say, "And then on top of that,
AI."
So, I always felt that the bottom wasn't
going to fall out of the chip industry
because of AI. Mhm. Um on the controls,
yeah, I had a a thought that the AI race
would be the race and I wanted to win
it. So, like you say, throwing sand in
the gears of China's operation felt like
a good thing to me.
It's pretty incredible on the uh cloud
thing you mentioned. We did an episode
recently
and we were we were talking to an
executive and he mentioned something
about uh the length of time of a recent
cloud migration project they were doing.
And in my head, I was like, "It's 2026
and large companies still have Like we
just sort of take it for granted that
everything is going to be in some cloud,
AWS, whatever."
>> Marco Argenti from the
>> Right, right. Yeah.
>> South
there's still huge cloud migration
projects that are happening and it's a
pretty extraordinary thing. Yeah.
I'm not certain we're going to see this
50 million people laid off tomorrow.
Like Yeah, that's a good indicator of
how slow these things can move. Pick
your big favorite big company. Turning
those companies like a little bit like
government, you can't turn on a dime.
If you have companies that are moving
from Excel and all these different
databases
to a fully agentic system,
it takes years, not months, which means
we have a minute to figure it out. Now,
did you know what I'm most worried
about?
I'm most worried that we do what we've
often done, which is
wait for the crisis before we have some
solutions.
Wait for mass unemployment before we get
serious about preparing.
And well, you know what I think. If that
happens, I think there will be
regulation to stop AI and I think it'll
be bad.
Let's actually talk a little bit more
about the CHIPS Act uh since we have you
here, and one of the concerns is like,
"Okay, people would say this is
you know, this is a type of industrial
policy that we haven't done in a while
in the United States." And one of the
questions is whether our political
system allows for that because
we had an election and the incumbent
party lost, and then new people came in,
etc. Where do sort of like, looking back
now, those CHIPS investments that were
made, can we say they survived the
transition? And how did the transition
affect the trajectory of this broader
um endeavor to have more domestic uh
semiconductor manufacturing? Yeah.
My biggest lesson from the CHIPS program
is when you do something like that,
make sure it's bipartisan. Mhm. It has
mostly survived,
actually. Now, TSMC is making
leading-edge chips
in Arizona the same way they are in
Taipei, Taiwan,
and they're going to expand.
Uh and this administration is like
helping, not hurting that. The same
thing with,
you know,
Intel and all these other companies. So,
it is surviving,
and I think it's
cuz it was
bipartisan. There were a lot of
leading Republican senators
who really wanted it to happen.
And I'm
in contrast to say,
like the Inflation Reduction Act,
which
you could argue was kind of also a
little bit of industrial policy in so
far as it was meant to accelerate our
path to a, you know, cleaner economy,
that was immediately undone cuz it was
passed on partisan lines.
Meanwhile, we couldn't have gotten it
done otherwise, so in no way am I
criticizing. I'm just saying I learned
the reality
that if we have any hope of having
continuity,
that it better be
bipartisanly popular beginning, middle,
and end. And my team, to whom I give
great credit, pushed me to spend a lot
of time on Capitol Hill even after we
got the money
to constantly update
Republican members of the Congress
to maintain its popularity. And I think
that I learned a big lesson with that.
How should we evaluate the success of
the CHIPS Act? Because,
you know,
the headlines nowadays are all about
Iran and the closure of the Strait of
Hormuz, and
everyone's minds are currently very
focused on choke points in the world,
and one of those major choke points
would be, if anything were to happen
between China and Taiwan.
And so I'm very curious, if we had a
situation like that,
would the US be self-sufficient? I'm not
sure if that's the right word, but
self-sufficient in its supply of chips?
What should we be aiming for here if
we're thinking about global choke choke
points for strategic tech?
This is the question. So when you say,
"Did you get it right?" I'm like,
directionally, yes. Perfectly, no. The
answer is is no.
If I This is not going to happen, but if
theoretically, possibly next year,
China has Taiwan and they cut off supply
of our chips. I don't think either of
those things would happen, but
theoretically,
it it would be like apocalyptically bad,
right? Like that would be very bad.
We're producing some chips in the US.
Our goal was to get from 0% of
leading-edge chips in the US to I think
20%
uh of global capacity by 2030.
We're on path to hit that goal.
But again, 20%.
So,
that's why number one, I think we need
to de-escalate, have stability and a
floor under our relationship with China.
It's good for them, it's good for us.
But also, we have to work with our
allies. We cannot, it is not possible.
One of the arguments I used to get into
with my old boss, President Biden,
call me Gub. He's like, "Gub, why can't
we make everything in America?" Like,
"Mr. President, we cannot. We don't have
enough people. That's inflationary. We
don't have enough. It's not a good goal.
We don't have enough land. We don't have
energy. We should make the most critical
things and work with our allies." And I
had that argument with him maybe 10
times. I lost every time. Huh. Uh no,
cuz he he's like, "I don't like that.
I'm going to make everything in
America." But this gets to my point,
like
not to alarm you further,
but
okay, let's say we did great with the
Chips Act. We're on our path, we're
making memory chips here.
Everything here.
We still don't really do what's called
advanced packaging. Yeah. They leave,
right? We make the chips and then they
head out. Yeah.
>> Not to
be too much of a nerd here, but No, this
is important.
>> Package is the you know, and by the way,
packaging isn't put the chips in a box.
Packaging is how they layer the chips,
which is incredibly sophisticated to get
enough compute on a chip.
Um
even though we're making them in
Arizona,
they go back to Taiwan for packaging.
Problem. Going to get that in America.
Um
uh I think it's 30% of printed circuit
boards
we import from China.
Uh almost all of the chemicals,
substrates, inputs that go into making
chips
come from China or Asia.
Uh if you did like a supply chain
breakdown of an AI data center,
you know, the cables, the wires, the
chemicals, the this, the that,
I think you'd
be not happy with how much of that still
comes from China.
So, okay, so what do you do about it?
Diversify and sufficiently
diversify sufficiently here and with
allies
so that China doesn't have so much
leverage over us.
That is the thing.
So, mindful of the time, I just have a
few minutes left. We did an episode, I
think, late last year with Frohman, who
is in the audience. Uh we chatted with
him and I don't think he expected us to
like turn the title He He had one
sentence that then we like used as
clickbait uh and turned it into the
title, but he had described uh the the
emerging like polyamorous global trading
order. And I thought that was a very
compelling word to describe all sorts
of, you know, on the fly different
arrangements. When you think about where
we should be going in the future, like
should
assuming this administration will
continue to antagonize allies, should
the goal really be to just like
build some clean blocks again, build
some clear blocks, not polyamorous
trading, but re- rebuild sort of uh
unambiguous partnerships with clear
lines and clear borders?
Um I I don't want to disagree with Mike,
but
He didn't He I'm not saying he was
advocating that. I think he was
describing the direction that things
seem to be going.
What would the opposite of polyamorous
be?
>> Well, In other words, Yeah, is No,
monogamous. Except in marriage, I'm not
for that in this example. Um
but I do In case my husband's listening,
I'm strongly for monogamy in my
>> [laughter]
>> other parts of life.
I think it's more like
we need to be more practical
and get along in so far as
we can keep
commerce going, avoid kinetic conflict,
and have a measure of
you know, national security.
So, for instance,
as secretary, I frequently advocated
within our team
a closer relationship with Indonesia and
the Philippines
for
nickel Mhm.
uh or other countries with cobalt, etc.
And was frequently pushed back on
that
you know, those countries don't hue to
our labor standards, they don't hue to
our environmental standards.
They're in China's backyard.
True.
But we don't live like the world of love
is different. Rationality can maybe go
out the window. This is the real world
here.
I would rather have a relationship
with like it's a it's you have to
balance. You have to balance. This
question of balance and practicality.
Fine.
You don't want to work with Indonesia
because you don't like that? I hear
that. I hear that. Is it better to buy
everything from China? I don't think so.
So,
true.
I think we have to kiss and make up with
Europe.
It's in our interest.
Yes, we we have stronger relationships
with countries that share our values,
that are democracies, that have a rule
of law.
I don't think in my lifetime we're ever
going to have a close relationship with
China, Russia, North Korea, and we
should call it as it is.
I think we have to work a hell of a lot
harder
to increase our economic ties
with Southeast Asia with countries in
Africa, with countries in Latin America
and be
you know, maybe not
we don't have to love them.
We got to work with them.
Cuz it's in our interest and it's in the
world's interest to de-escalate.
Gina Raimondo, thank you so much. That
was a fan- that was fantastic. Thank
you. All right, shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there. This has been
another episode of the Odd Lots podcast.
I'm Tracy Alloway. You can follow me at
Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at The Stalwart. Follow our guest
Gina Raimondo at Gina Raimondo. Follow
our producers Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Arman, Dashiel Bennett at Dashbot, and
Kil Brooks at Kil Brooks. And a big
thank you to CFR. And for more Odd Lots
content, go to Bloomberg.com/oddlots
for the daily newsletter and all of our
episodes. You can chat about all these
topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/oddlots.
And if you enjoy Odd Lots, if you like
it when we do these live events, then
please leave us a positive review on
your favorite podcast platform. And
remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely ad-free. All you
need to do is find the Bloomberg channel
on Apple Podcasts and follow the
instructions there.
>> Thanks for watching.